>> Kyle Simpson: Okay, part 2.
A little bit more
challenging than part one.
A little bit more to weed through.
Hopefully you're feeling a little
bit better about what it means to
think modularly, because this is as much
a design pattern as it is a set of syntax.
So let's talk through the ex fixed b,
the part two solution, if you will.
First, right off the bat,
I have now a helper's object.
And I went ahead and moved those
three constants, max visible work
description length, min work
description length, and max work time.
I went ahead and
moved those from constants to
properties on this name space object.
Cuz they're also really being
used by these helpers anyway.
So they are not needed anywhere
else other than on this name space.
Now, we need to move those three
functions as we described.
I will need to validate work entry format,
work description and
format time, move that to this object.
And the only thing that I needed to
change about the internals of them was
their reference needed to have a Helpers
dot in front of this constance.
So I have Helpers., Helpers.maxVisible,
Helpers.maxVisible down
here.
>> Kyle Simpson: Any
questions about moving the static
functions into that Helpers
name space?
>> Kyle Simpson: Okay,
this isn't a module, remember?
Because it's not using encapsulation,
it's not stateful.
So it's not a module, but
it is a helpful way to organize
our code into a name space.
Now, let's look at the setup UI function.
This is part of what our
previous [INAUDIBLE] module has.
So you'll notice that the variables
I moved in here were the ones that
the UI-related stuff would
need like the templates.
These are my DOM elements that
I'm gonna store references to,
and importantly I have
two new objects here.
Which are gonna store by ID,
the DOM elements that I create for
each entry in my data model.
So projectElements,
I'm gonna store by project ID all of
those project DOM elements that I create.
And then, workElements, it's gonna
store each one of the individual ones.
So when I receive a call and
a I receive a workEntry ID I'm gonna
be able to take that ID, look up and find
the DOM element that it's associated with.
That's instead of taking my DOM elements
and polluting my data model with them,
it's keeping a UI data model separate
from my business logic data model, okay?
Now, I declared a public API,
which has my init, addProject basically,
the methods that are UI related,
I went ahead and exposed those on my UI.
Now, this function setupUI can be called,
theoretically, it could be called multiple
times, so we theoretically could
be creating multiple UI instances.
You're probably only gonna create one,
but it's not a bad idea to go ahead and
create it as a function just in case,
maybe for
testing purposes, we'd like to create
multiple UI instances to mock stuff out.
So, now, I have it as a function
rather than as a singleton.
And up here's how I created it,
I created an instance of that
module by calling setupUI.
I store it in the UI variable,
and I call UI.init.
So I initialized the user interface
portion of the application,
all the DOM element stuff
has been initialized.
Now, I'm gonna call app.
Now, I need to set up app function,
which we don't have before,
which we haven't had before.
I need to pass in my UI instance, so
my app knows which UI instance to talk to.
That's again helpful for
test mocking if we needed to have the app
talk to a mock dom, mock UI if you will.
So let's look at setup app.
Setup app, again, on line 187 there.
It takes the UI instance.
Now, you'll notice I'm
creating some other variables,
here I've got a list of projects.
So my list of projects that
was in app is still here.
I've got a total time variable now,
because I didn't need that stored on
the projects array,
now it's stored as it's own variable.
And my public API here has
methods that relate to adding and
getting data about my data model.
addProject, and addWorkToProject existed,
getWorkEntryCount and
getWorkEntryLocation were ones that I
invented, because I needed to provide
information about the data model to
the UI method, so it knew what to do.
So let's look at those, because those two
are different than what we had before.
Get work entry code
pretty straight forward
based upon the project ID called against,
I need to look up that project ID,
and then return the length
of its work array.
So I just need to know how many
work elements have been added to
a particular project.
Work entry locations
are a little bit more involved,
I not only need to find out which index,
or I mean,
what ID is the adjacent one to
add something into the DOM with.
But I also need to figure out whether,
or not I should insert before, or after.
So what's going on here is, it's easy
to insert the data into my data model,
and then just call sort on my data model,
so
that it's sorted by
descending amount of time.
But it's not so
easy to do that with the DOM.
The DOM I need to exactly which DOM
element I need to insert after,
or insert before.
So the way I figure out which
DOM element it is, is to ask for
the current DOM element
that I am dealing with.
So, in other words,
find the current DOM element, and
then I either need to know should
I insert before, or insert after.
So that's what this function's about,
it's just grabbing that information and
returning that.
I'm returning both of those pieces
of information in an array, so
that the UI function can use it.
So we'll show you in a moment
how the UI function uses it.
You notice that there's nothing in my app
anymore that deals with DOM elements,
it's all purely data model oriented stuff.
So this is a much cleaner
separation of concerns.
>> Kyle Simpson: When I wanna call the UI,
like for example, here on 211, when I
have added a project to the data model,
now I want to add that
project into the UI.
So I call off the UI add project to list,
which creates the project entry,
the box at the bottom.
And then, add project selection adds
the entry to my drop down for my projects.
I just call those two UI methods and
I pass along the data that they need.
I pass along the project ID.
Pass along the project description.
So let's look at what
those methods look like.
Add project to list.
Just takes the idea in the description
shouldn't be even really needed to change
this one, but the one thing that's
different here now is line 110,
where I need to store a reference
to that project's DOM element, so
I can use it later.
So I create the project DOM element, and
then I store it into that projectElements
object at the projectId location.
>> Kyle Simpson: Same
thing with adding project work entries,
I store the workEntry in
workElements at its ID location.
Those objects then are letting me look
up later when I need to get at some DOM
element to do something with it, I now
have a list of those DOM elements that I
can go and look them up by ID, okay?
>> Kyle Simpson: All right, so
let's follow the workflow here.
In initUI,
we set up a subNewWorkEntry click handler.
What does submit new work entry do?
Well, it grabs the data from the form
like the project ID that was selected in
the drop down,
the description, the minutes.
It validates them before,
now calling Helpers.validate.
And it unsets the form, so that we
basically reset the form each time.
And now, it calls app.addwork to project.
That's a data model-oriented thing.
So let's hand that data off to
the data model to let it do its thing.
Now, at .addworktoproject,
if we come down here, we already looked at
this one, this does the data model stuff.
It updates the total amount of
time accrued across all projects.
It creates a project entry.
Time, it adds to the time
in the project entry.
It creates a work entry for
the new work that's been added and
adds that, pushes that on the list.
If this list is more than one,
it goes ahead and sorts it.
And then,
we call these three UI functions.
The UI function is going to say
add that work entry to my list,
update the project total time,
that's the little thing that gives us
the updated time, and
update the work log total time.
That's for each project.
I mean, that's for
the total overall versus the project.
Passing in the data, so let's go
look back at add work entry to list,
we're taking a projectID
in the workEntryData.
We pass along, here is how we create
those DOM elements, we save them.
Here's how I use the stuff in app.
I say, App.getWorkEntryCount, so I'm
asking how many work entries are there.
I don't want to inspect
the dome to figure that out,
that's a data model question,
not a DOM question.
So I ask the data model,
how many entries are there?
If there's more than one entry,
then I know I need to figure out
a specific location to insert this thing.
If this was the only entry,
I can just append it, no big deal, okay?
Let's say I do need to figure
out where to insert it.
Well, I need to get that information, so
I'm gonna store the adjacentworkentryid
and the insertbefore.
I am gonna get those by calling that
getworkentrylocation and this syntax,
if you haven't seen that before
that's called array destruction.
I get back a single array
from that function and
I break it into it's two
individual pieces of data.
So, now, I say,
if you told me to insert before the ID.
I look for the work element of the ID and
I call before.
If you told me to not insert before,
then I'm gonna look up that work
element ID and insert it after.
So that's given me the information I need
to know about which element should I
insert this either before, or
after in the DOM.
>> Kyle Simpson: If I don't have more
than one element, it's as simple as make
the project entry itself visible and
append the work entry into the list.
A lot of that logic was already there, but
I needed to figure out a clean way to
separate the data model and the UI part.
This is just one way of doing it.
You may have chosen to keep those pieces
of logic separate in a different way.
This is not the only way, but
I wanted to cleanly separate the semantics
of what I do in the UI with DOM elements
versus what the data model tracks.
What the app data model tracks.
>> Kyle Simpson: We
also solve the calls from app to these
two UI methods update project total time,
and update work log total time,
those are pretty straightforward they
just grab the appropriate DOM element,
and update their information.
>> Kyle Simpson: So,
big picture here, we now have a Helpers
name space with the static Helpers on it.
And we have a UI module, which its state
that it tracks is all the state of the UI.
And then,
we have the app module, who's state is all
of the business logic data model stuff.
Three separate entities that do their own,
that take care of their own concerns.
Now, I chose a very
deliberate architecture here,
which might be different then the way
you would have architected this app, and
that's entirely okay.
It was to take you down a path of
understanding what can modules do for me.
Many people these days seem to
be enamored with components,
it's the hot rage in react and
all the other frameworks out there.
And in the component world,
we think about everything, UI,
business logic, all that stuff,
all in one component.
So if you thought about it that way, you
could have made an individual module for
each of these different
concerns in the page, and
it would have track its own DOM and
its own data model.
And then, you'd have another one
over here tracking its own DOM and
its own data model.
So you might have had a component for the
form, and then you might have had another
component for that total time thing that's
being printed, and another component for
each of the projects.
And then, within those components,
you'd have a component for
each of the work entries within it.
That's the more React style, or
component style way of architecting apps.
And if that feels more familiar to you,
that's fine.
The point I'm trying to make is that you
could've done that with modules as well.
That doesn't necessarily mean that
you have to go the classes route like
React does.
We could've gone that route with modules.
I wanted to illustrate a simpler way of
just dividing out the behavior [COUGH]
using the module pattern.
>> Kyle Simpson: What
questions could I answer
about this approach?
So I was talking a little earlier there's
a question about why didn't I use the IIFE
pattern on the UI?
Why'd I make a set-up UI function?
Primarily I made a setup UI function
instead of an IIFE, because theoretically
if we were doing a test suite for this, we
might wanna mock out multiple different UI
instances, so I'd wanna be able to call
the setup UI function multiple times.
Same thing with app, I'd wanna be
able to create multiple apps, so
that I can mock against
different UI instances.
So I might wanna have
multiple App instances.
So it was basically just future
thinking if I wanted to do
testing.
>> Speaker 2: Is the helpers thing,
is that a name space just for
convenience's sake of this demo?
Or why would that not be a nodule?
>> Kyle Simpson: The reason it's not
a module is,
because it doesn't have any state.
You could make it into a module, and
then it's a bunch of unnecessary
boiler plate for no benefit.
So for me, the best code is the simplest
code that gets the job done appropriately.
Here, because that stuff, by its very
nature does not have any state to it,
there's no reason to make it into
a module, or a class, or anything else.
It's just stuff that needs to
be collected into a name space.
So I think that's the appropriate way to
organize that particular piece of code.
Yeah?
>> Speaker 3: I'm not sure how
to phrase this question,
but when writing this,
do you go into it going these
are my helper functions?
I know for a fact that they're
not gonna have any state, so
I'm gonna write it like this.
Or do you end up refactoring
it after the fact?
Are you pre-planning that this is
gonna be stateless type object, or
I'm just wondering about your methodology.
Or do you end up coming back through,
and refactoring it?
Maybe you did make it a module,
thinking it was.
Just how do you start writing?
Cuz we're refactoring existing code,
but if he starts, or I start, or
someone starts writing it,
then we start writing in a module pattern,
and then you come back, or do you start to
plan that stuff out in advance?
>> Kyle Simpson: That's actually a much
bigger question than even the scope of
what we're discussing within this course.
So, for example,
the functional course that I teach,
we talk a lot more about being very
careful to design real functions,
meaning I got input, and I pull data
back out and that sort of thing.
And I've got a book on that topic.
So my instinct is to look for
any opportunity that I can to create real
functions like that, that are stateless,
and take data in and get data back out.
Because, that's more amenable to
functional programming principles,
which makes code easier to read and
verify, and all of that.
But I would say in real
response to your answer both.
You start out hopefully looking for
that probably make some mistakes and
have to go back and refactor a lot of it.
It is a highly irritative process.
So even in making this exercise for
this course I redid it a bunch of
different times, cuz I kept changing my
mind on not only what would be good to
demonstrate to people taking the course.
But also just, what's good architecture,
what's a good clean separation.
I didn't have that
preplanned out perfectly.
I figured it out as I went along and
I think that's generally how
I write real code is sort of,
I've got a general idea on what's a good
practice, but I have to figure out as
the rubber meets the road, what's the best
way to do that for any given piece.
Unfortunately, there's
no magic formula there,
it's just developing the instinct for,
well,
if this doesn't need to be stateful,
it's probably better if it isn't.
Because state list code is
a lot easier to verify and
maintain and audit than sateful code.
So I wanted to make as much of
that state list as I could.
>> Speaker 4: So, in this case,
is it truly a decision of separating
the code which has side effects from
the pure code?
>> Kyle Simpson: I mean, that's more
of a question for the functional products.
>> Speaker 4: If you
consistently want to refactor
the direction, eventually end up having
functions as a side effect code.
>> Kyle Simpson: It's
not that what you're saying is wrong,
I'm just saying it's an orthogonal topic.
To ask should I always do this,
or should I not?
If you don't like functional programming
you don't wanna got that direction.
If you like functional programming you
wanna go that direction as much as you
possibly can, but that's separate from
the questions of given a set of things
where I do need to manage some state
can the module pattern help me do that?